astro-ph/9406015 6 Jun 94        The Flattened Dark Halo of Polar Ring Galaxy NGC 4650A:
                                                 A Conspiracy of Shapes?

                                                    Penny D. Sackett and Hans-Walter Rix1
                                               Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ 08540

                                                                Brian J. Jarvis2

                                            European Southern Observatory, La Silla, CHILE

                                                                      and
                                                             Kenneth C. Freeman

                                            Mt. Stromlo Observatory, Canberra, AUSTRALIA

                                                           ABSTRACT

                                 Kinematics and photometry of the polar ring galaxy NGC 4650A, including new
                              observations of the rotation and velocity dispersion of its central stellar disk, are
                              used to infer the presence of a dark matter halo and to measure its shape. Fits to
                              the observed disk and polar ring rotation curves from detailed mass and photometric
                              modeling rule out a spherical dark halo. The best t models have halos with isodensity
                              surfaces that are attened to a shape between E6 and E7 (axis ratios between 0.4 and
                              0.3); the asymptotic equatorial speeds of these models are in excellent agreement with
                              the I-band Tully-Fisher relation. This degree of dark halo attening is larger than that
                              expected from N-body collapse simulations of dissipationless dark matter. Since the
                              kinematics and surface brightness pro le of the central luminous body indicate that
                              its light has an intrinsic axis ratio c=a < 0:4, in NGC 4650A the radial \conspiracy"
                              between the dark and luminous components that leads to at rotation curves may
                              extend to the shape of the mass distribution as well.

                              Subject headings: dark matter | galaxies: halos | galaxies: kinematics and dynamics
                              | galaxies: individual (NGC 4650A) | galaxies: structure | polar ring galaxies

                             To appear in: The Astrophysical Journal

                           1Hubble Fellow
                           2Current Address: Defence Science and Technology Organisation, P.O. Box 1500,
                           Salisbury, 5108, AUSTRALIA
                                            {2{

                                1. Introduction

    Dark matter halos have generally been assumed to be spherical, despite the lack of strong
observational evidence to support this hypothesis. Although theoretical arguments based on the
stability of disk galaxies against bar formation have been used in support of dark halos over dark
disks (Ostriker & Peebles 1973), it is now believed that hot disks (Athanassoula & Sellwood 1987)
and bulges (Kalnajs 1987) may be more e cient stabilizers than extended spherical halos. The

HI rotation curves of normal spiral galaxies that have indicated (together with the assumption of

Newtonian gravity) the presence of large amounts of radially extended unseen matter, are unable
to place constraints on the vertical distribution of this dark matter because kinematics are usually
measured only in the plane of the stellar disk. In order to study the attening of the dark matter
distribution, a luminous tracer must be found that probes the potential far from the galactic plane.
Such studies have been carried out for only a handful of systems to date; the results are mixed.

    The axis ratio of the massive dark halo of the Milky Way has been estimated by Binney, May
& Ostriker (1987), assuming that the kinematics of extreme Population II stars are similar to those
of the dark constituents in the halo. Using Stackel potentials as a mass model for the Galaxy, this
study concluded that the mass distribution of the halo must have a vertical-to-radial axis ratio
between 0.3 and 0.6 (or between E7 and E4 in the notation used to describe the shape of elliptical
galaxies) in order to match the observed anisotropy of the velocity dispersion characteristic of the
extreme Population II stars.

    By measuring the attening of the extended X-ray isophotes around the elliptical galaxy
NGC 720, Buote and Canizares (1994) have used the assumption of hydrostatic equilibrium to
derive the shape of the underlying mass distribution of this system. They nd that the axis ratio
of the total gravitating matter lies between E5 and E7 that is, slightly atter than the E4 shape
of the projected light. After estimating the mass distributions of the stars and gas from surface
brightness pro les, they t the dark matter directly and nd shapes in good agreement with those
derived for the total mass in the system.

    The attening of the total mass distribution of the S0 galaxy NGC 4753 has been estimated
by Steiman-Cameron, Kormendy & Durisen (1992) to lie between E0.1 and E1.6 on the basis of
 tting an inclined, precessing disk model to the dust lanes seen against the stellar light, which
has a projected E4 shape. The goodness-of- t of their excellent model for the complicated dust
patterns is independent of the attening of the underlying potential; the attening determination
is based on the assumption that the gas orbits are lled and have completed at least 6 rotation
periods at all radii. With these assumptions, mass distributions atter than E1.6 would have
caused the dusty disk to have precessed more than is observed. If the total mass in this system
is considerably rounder than that of the light, as their work would indicate, the dark matter in
NGC 4753 would dominate the potential inside the optical radius, contrary to what is found in
most early spirals.
                                            {3{

    Polar ring galaxies (PRG) are early-type galaxies surrounded by outer rings of gas, dust and
stars on orbits that are nearly perpendicular to the plane of the attened central galaxy, which
rotates about its own apparent minor axis (for reviews, see Whitmore et al. 1990, Casertano,
Sackett & Briggs 1991). Steiman-Cameron & Durisen (1982) pointed out a decade ago that PRG
could be used as probes of the shape of galactic gravitational potentials. Polar orbits, unlike
orbits in the equatorial plane, are quite sensitive to the vertical distribution of mass, and thus to
the attening of the dark matter halo. In an oblate attened potential, closed polar orbits are
elongated along the polar axis and have smaller rotational speeds as they cross the polar axis than
do closed orbits in the equatorial plane at the same galactocentric radius. Schweizer, Whitmore &
Rubin (1983) and Whitmore, McElroy & Schweizer (1987, hereafter WMS) were the rst to apply
this test; they compared the ratio of ring and disk rotation speeds at a galactocentric radius of
0:6 R25 (i.e., at about one-half the optical radius of the central galaxy) in each of three PRG to
that which would be expected for orbits in a scale-free logarithmic potential. WMS concluded that
the axis ratios of the potentials ranged from 0.86 0.21 to 1.05 0.17 in these three galaxies.
Since for the logarithmic potential used by WMS the isodensity surfaces are roughly three times
more attened than the corresponding equipotentials (cf. Binney & Tremaine 1987, p48), the
WMS results encompass mass distributions with a wide range of attenings. The only polar ring
galaxy known to have an elliptical (rather than an S0) as its central host, AM 2020-504, has been
modeled by Arnaboldi et al. (1993), who found that a halo attened by the same amount as the
projected light (E4) produced a somewhat better t to the ring kinematics than a spherical halo
(E0).

    The shape of dark matter halos is thus an open question. It is also an important one: a
strongly attened dark matter distribution would imply that the dark constituents are (or were)
dissipative, and therefore probably baryonic. Recent results from experiments (Alcock et al.
1993, Aubourg et al. 1993, Udalski et al. 1993) searching for microlensing of stars in the Magellanic
Clouds due to compact objects in our own halo (i.e., MACHOs) lend credence to the idea that
a measurable fraction of the dark halo of the Milky Way may be composed of baryonic matter.
These results must be interpreted with care, since a substantially attened halo would have a
smaller optical depth to gravitational lensing toward the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds
(Sackett & Gould 1993, Gould, Miralda-Escude & Bahcall 1994), thus reducing the number of
events that the microlensing experiments could detect for a given MACHO mass distribution.

    One of the three systems studied by WMS was the prototypical polar ring galaxy NGC 4650A,
for which these authors estimated that the vertical-to-radial axis ratio of the isopotential surfaces
was 0.86 0.21, implying an axis ratio of about 0.6 (E4) for the isodensity surfaces of the galaxy
interior to 0:6 R25. A more recent analysis of NGC 4650A (Sackett & Sparke 1990, hereafter SS)
used the WMS dataset together with kinematics from other sources, and compared the entire
extent of both ring and disk rotation curves to detailed mass models that separated the e ects of
the disk, ring, and halo potentials. They concluded that a range of dark halo attenings from E0
to E8 (i.e., axis ratios of the halo isodensity surfaces between 1.0 and 0.2) were permitted by the
                                            {4{
data, with an E6 dark matter halo giving the best t. Since polar rings are nearly always gas-rich
(Shane 1980, Schechter et al. 1984, van Gorkom, Schechter & Kristian 1987, hereafter GSK,
Richter, Sackett & Sparke 1994), their kinematics are generally determined through emission-line

spectroscopy in the H line of ionized hydrogen or the 21cm HI line of neutral hydrogen. The

central bodies of polar ring galaxies, on the other hand, are nearly devoid of gas, hence their
kinematics must be derived from di cult stellar absorption line measurements. Uncertainty in the
kinematics of the central stellar body prevented SS from making a tighter determination of the
shape of the dark matter halo for NGC 4650A.

    The primary advantage of NGC 4650A over other systems for studies of the attening of the
dark halo is that the polar ring in NGC 4650A extends to much larger heights above the disk plane
(at least 16 kpc or 20 disk scale lengths!) so that the e ects of the luminous and dark matter can
be cleanly separated. Furthermore, the wealth of data now available for this system allow us to
build self-consistent models for its kinematics that are highly constrained.

    This paper presents new observations of the kinematics of the central galaxy of NGC 4650A,
and uses these new data together with other observational constraints to discriminate between
mass models of di ering dark halo oblateness, placing tight limits on the shape of the dark

matter distribution of this galaxy. In x2, we present and discuss the new observations: improved
absorption-line kinematics of the central disk and I-band photometry of the system. In x3, each

component of the mass model we use for NGC 4650A is discussed together with the observations
that constrain its free parameters. In this section, we also give analytic expressions in cylindrical
coordinates for the gravitational force due to an ellipsoidal, pseudo-isothermal halo of arbitrary

 attening. In x4, we describe how model orbits are calculated and analyzed in order to allow

a direct comparison with the data. In particular, we discuss how we enforce radial hydrostatic
equilibrium and model the e ects of line-of-sight integration, seeing convolution, projection. The

results of tting the models to the observations are presented in x5; we show that observational

constraints indicate the presence of a dark halo in NGC 4650A that is attened, with isodensity

surfaces of axis ratio 0:3 < c=a < 0:4. Implications of this result are discussed in x6 where our

 ndings are summarized.

                        2. Observations of NGC 4650A

                   2.1. New Kinematics of the Central Galaxy

    The central stellar body of NGC 4650A was rst shown to be rotating about its apparent
minor axis by Schechter, Ulrich & Boksenberg (1984), which indicated that the system was
an oblate stellar system encircled by a nearly polar ring, not a prolate one surrounded by an
equatorial ring. Their result was con rmed by WMS, who found that the amplitude of the rotation
was comparable to the central velocity dispersion. The substantial rotation, together with the
                         {5{

exponential pro le of the disk surface brightness, led WMS to the conclusion that the central
stellar body was an S0 disk.

    The low surface brightness of the stellar disk, compared to the night sky, makes the
measurement of stellar kinematics more di cult than deriving the ring kinematics from emission
line ring gas; this is especially true at large galactocentric radius. It was the uncertainty in the
WMS disk rotation curve that prevented SS from making a tight determination of the shape of
the gravitational potential of NGC 4650A. In addition, a sharp dip ( 30 km s 1) in the measured
disk speeds at 2-3 scale lengths (1200-1600) observed by WMS on both sides of the central galaxy
was troubling; if real and due to steady-state gravitational e ects, it would indicate a sharp dip in
the surface mass density of the disk with no corresponding dip in luminosity. For these reasons,
we undertook deep long-slit spectroscopy along the major axis of the central stellar component of
NGC 4650A in order to obtain a more well-determined stellar disk rotation curve, and, if possible,
to extend it to larger radius.

    The long-slit data were obtained on 1 May 1990 using the Boller and Chivens spectrograph
attached to the 3.6m telescope operated by the European Southern Observatory at La Silla,
Chile. The detector was an RCA SID 503 CCD (1024 x 640 pixels) with a read-out noise of
approximately 24 electrons. On-chip binning along the slit produced a pixel size of 1.6500, and
gave a nal frame format of 210 x 1024 pixels. The grating was used in second order, yielding a
dispersion of 59 A/mm centered at 5500A and a spectral range that included both the Mg b
and Na I absorption lines. Table 1 lists the instrumental parameters. In average seeing of 2.200,
a total of four 90-minute exposures were taken with the slit aligned along the major axis of the
central galaxy, passing through the nucleus at a position angle of 241o. Exposures were interlaced
with HeAr arc exposures to monitor the geometric stability of the instrument. Suitable standard
template stars were also observed against which the rotation velocities and velocity dispersions
could be measured.

              Table 1: Instrumental Parameters

Detector                      RCA Hi-Res ESO CCD #8
Spectrograph                  Boller and Chivens
Frame format                  210 x 1024 (3 x 1 binning)
Dispersion                    0.872 A/pixel
Pixel size                    47 km s 1/pixel
Wavelength range              1.65" x 0.872 A (15 m pixels)
Instrumental Dispersion       5085 { 5980 A
Slit width
Slit length                    68 km s 1
                              300
                              2.90
                                            {6{

    The removal of CCD bias, at- elding with quartz-lamp and sky exposures, and cosmic-ray
removal were performed using standard IRAF tasks. Transformation from pixel coordinates,
I = I(x; y), to wavelength{slit position coordinates, I = I(log ; s), was achieved with the IRAF
tasks tcoords and transform, using the arc exposures and traces of the template stars. This
transformation was applied to all galaxy and template star exposures, yielding images with the slit
coordinate, s, in one direction and log in the other. The four separate major axis exposures were
co-added into one image at this stage. At the galaxy center, where there is su cient signal-to-noise
in the individual constituent spectra, the velocity dispersion, , measured from the individual
exposures agreed with that measured from the combined data.

    Compensation for di erences in the observed continuum shapes between the galaxy and
template spectra was made by subtracting a fth order polynomial from both. The velocities
and dispersions were measured by shifting and broadening template spectra by trial amounts and
comparing them to the galaxy data in pixel space; a Gaussian broadening function, parameterized
by its mean, v, and dispersion, , was assumed. For each point along the major axis, the kinematic
parameters v and are taken to be those that minimize the 2 di erence between the galaxy and
template spectra. Errors in these parameters are de ned by the 2 = 1 contour in parameter
space, which corresponds to a 68% (1-sigma) con dence limit. (The technique is discussed in Rix
and White 1992 and in Rix et al. 1994, see p. 29.)

    The errors calculated from 2 do not re ect systematic errors, such as those due to imperfect
sky subtraction or the use of a mismatched template spectrum. We estimated the e ect of such
errors by comparing the four individual galaxy frames to one another and analyzing the data
using three di erent template spectra. Since the velocity dispersion of the galaxy is not much
larger than the \instrumental dispersion," it is more susceptible than v to systematic errors. Our
derived values for di er by 5 km s 1 between these various methods of reducing the data; we
take this as an estimate of the systematic errors in the reduction process.

    Since the mass models can reproduce only the anti-symmetric part of the rotation curve
and ring dust may a ect measurements at intermediate radii, we have adopted a systemic
radial velocity that produces an anti-symmetric rotation curve at the galaxy center and at large
galactocentric radius. Our nal disk velocities and velocity dispersions are plotted in Fig. 1 and
listed in Table 2. This table also contains estimates of the statistical variances due to known noise
sources (i.e., photon noise and read-out noise).

    Due to the higher S/N of our observations, our measured disk velocities have uncertainties
that are about a factor of two smaller than those measured by WMS in the inner region of the
disk. We do not see the 30 km s 1 \dip" in rotation speeds at 12-1600 reported by WMS; within
our smaller uncertainties, our measured disk speeds rise smoothly and linearly from the center
to 1200, where they turn over and atten. On the approaching (northeastern) side of the disk, a
foreground star at 1800 along the major axis contaminated the spectrum; we have discarded
spectra within 1.500 of the star. It is possible that the spectra within 2.500 may also contain a
fraction of light from this foreground star, but we estimate that it would constitute no more than
                   {7{

15% of total signal. The velocity measurement at 300 on the southwest side of the galaxy may be
a ected by foreground dust from the ring; the same e ect is evident in the WMS data. The low
disk surface brightness of NGC 4650A forced us to combine spectra at 20{3000 into one spatial bin
in order to ensure su cient S/N to determine a reliable line center. Within the large uncertainties
at these radii, our velocities are consistent with the WMS speeds of 100{110 km s 1, though
it is unclear to us how their measurement was made since we estimate that their instrumental
parameters yield S/N <1.0 per spectral resolution element at these distances.

Table 2: Disk Major Axis Kinematics for NGC 4650A

R 00]   V km s 1]  V    km s 1]
                           61.4 34.2
-23.93  -135.3 27.3        38.0 23.6
-15.68  -47.0 18.6         89.9 19.5
-14.03  -57.7 16.9         63.7 14.0
-12.38  -72.2 14.3         45.4 9.9
-10.73  -68.7 7.8          77.5 9.6
-9.08   -59.4 9.5          45.2 6.8
-7.43   -50.5 6.1          60.9 4.8
-5.78   -23.2 4.8          63.0 4.5
-4.13   -32.6 4.3          54.3 3.4
-2.48   -25.6 3.0          60.4 2.4
-0.83   -0.4 2.6           59.5 2.1
0.83    3.2 2.6            57.0 4.1
2.48    12.2 3.9           64.8 9.2
4.13    43.8 7.4           70.4 8.9
5.78    44.2 7.4           56.5 7.2
7.43    63.0 6.5           70.8 8.9
9.08    61.5 8.7           45.3 9.9
10.73   79.7 7.4           71.6 16.4
12.38   87.2 12.1          65.4 17.1
14.03   71.7 15.6          43.8 23.6
15.68   89.2 14.3           6.4 25.7
17.33   90.9 2.6           10.8 133.2
25.58   91.7 35.1
                                            {8{

Fig. 1.{ The observed stellar line-of-sight velocity (top) and velocity dispersion (bottom) as a function of

galactocentric radius along the major axis of the central disk component of NGC 4650A. Velocities are
derived from the new deep long-slit observations described in x2. Approaching (eastern) velocities are
indicated by open circles, receding (western) velocities by solid circles. Error bars are 1 . The spectra
near 1800 on the northeastern side of the galaxy were contaminated by a foreground star that lies along the
major axis of the disk.

    Our line-of-sight dispersions are symmetric about the photometric center of the galaxy, have
a measured central value of about 60 km s 1, and remain constant or decline very slowly to the
last reliably-measured point at a radius of about 1400 (i.e., 3 disk scale lengths). The dispersions
derived by WMS are asymmetric with respect to the galaxy center, have much larger uncertainties,
and decline with radius from about 90 km s 1 at the center to about 50 km s 1 at 1000. If
the di erence between their values on the two sides of the galaxy is taken as a measure of the
true uncertainties, our measurements are consistent with WMS. Our higher spectral resolution
and higher S/N give much tighter constraints on (R). Since the dispersion measurements
become much less reliable at large galactocentric radius, we experimented with templates of xed
dispersion (60 km s 1) in order to derive the line-of-sight velocities in the disk. Such xed- ts
were consistent with the results from free- ts.

    In order to check the extent to which the approximate constancy of (R) with radius could
be due to insu cient spectral resolution, we derived dispersions for unbroadened stars (with high
S/N) using other stars taken during the same night as templates. The resulting dispersion due
to pixel interpolation during the wavelength calibration and template mismatch was only about
0.4 pixels, or 19 km s 1. When subtracted in quadrature, this would imply a 5% downward
correction to is indicated for the highest signal-to-noise (S/N > 13) galaxy spectra. Extending
these tests into the low signal-to-noise regime (S/N=6.5) by adding gaussian noise to the stellar
                                            {9{
test spectra produced \spurious" dispersions rarely larger than about 0.52 pixels or 24 km s 1|
corresponding to a 8% downward correction from 60 km s 1. Therefore, to correct for pixel
interpolation and template mismatch, we have subtracted 19 km s 1 in quadrature from to
obtain the dispersion measurements presented in Table 2, Fig. 1 and all subsequent plots.

                         2.2. New I-band Photometry

    The I-band images of NGC 4650A were acquired on 30 March 1992 at the Mt. Stromlo and
Siding Springs Observatory (MSSSO) 2.3-m telescope with the Nasmyth focal reducer, using a
thinned Tektronix 1024 CCD and a lter that gives an accurate approximation to the Cousins
I-band. The image scale was 0.60 arcsec pixel 1. Weather conditions were photometric. E-region
standards were observed several times during the night in order to transform the images onto the
standard Cousins I-band system. The image in Fig. 2 was obtained by co-adding three 300-sec
exposures and one 100-sec exposure; the shorter exposure was needed because the photon counts
from the innermost few pixels of NGC 4650A in the 300-sec exposures approached the A/D
saturation level of the CCD system. Conventional techniques were used to debias, at eld and
combine the images. The sky surface brightness was measured to be 18.84 I mag arcsec 2. Faint
residual fringing is visible in the image at a level below about 1% of sky. After masking out all
foreground stars, we estimate that the total I-band magnitude of NGC 4650A is mI = 11:43 0:03.
By modeling the central galaxy as an inclined exponential disk (but giving no weight to regions
with strong dust contamination) and then subtracting its light from the image, we estimate that
the ring contributes 28+86% of the total light, making the central disk about 2.5 times brighter
than the ring in the I-band.

Fig. 2.{ I-band image of NGC 4650A shown with logarithmic contrast. North and east are approximately

up and to the right, respectively.
                                           { 10 {
    Fig. 3 shows the surface brightness pro les in the I-band along the major and minor axes of
the central body of NGC 4650A. For comparison, the B-band pro le from WMS along the major
axis is also shown. The major axis pro le is exponential, with a dip at about 500 on the southwest
side due to extinction from ring dust where the inner ring orbits pass in front of the disk; as
expected, the dip is more pronounced in the B-band. In general, the shape of the pro le is very
similar in both bands. The color of the central disk of NGC 4650A is B-I = 1.8, and no signi cant
large scale radial color gradient is evident in the central 1500. In the center of the galaxy, a narrow
brightness enhancement comparable in width to the size of the 1.600 seeing disk can be seen above
the exponential pro le in the B pro le . This central feature appears to be bluer than the disk,
although just how much bluer is di cult to estimate since the seeing was worse for the I-band
(2.2500) photometric observations than for the B-band (1.600). The bright feature at 1800 on the
northwestern side of the galaxy is a red foreground star.

Fig. 3.{ The surface brightness pro le along the major (top) and minor (bottom) axes of the disk of

NGC 4650A in the I-band (solid squares, this work) and in the B-band (open squares, from WMS). Note
the o set in the magnitude scale for the two bands. The thin (solid) and thick (dashed) exponential disk
models (x3.1) are shown superposed; the two ts are nearly identical, but imply di erent inclinations and
scale lengths. Extinction at about 400 can be seen on the western side of the major axis pro le where dust
in the polar ring passes in front of the disk. A star about 1800 along the eastern major axis of the disk is
apparent as a local brightness peak.

    Surface brightness pro les along the major axis of the ring in I (our image) and B (from
WMS) are shown in Fig. 4. Light along the minor axis of the central object extends out to about
1500 in this pro le. The ring is much bluer than the central body; at 3000 along the ring major
                                           { 11 {
axis the ring color is B-I 0.8. Bi-symmetric knots at about 3000 are seen in the B-band pro le
and in the I-band image (Fig. 2). The poorer seeing during the I-band observations degrades the
sharpness of these peaks in the I-band pro le. We interpret the knots as line-of-sight integration
e ects as the ring twists through edge-on at this radius, consistent with an increased brightness of
about a factor of two.

Fig. 4.{ The surface brightness pro le along the major axis of the polar ring of NGC 4650A in the I-band

(solid squares, this work) and in the B-band (open squares, from WMS). A transparent ring model, warped
according to the prescription described in x4.1, with mass M = 2:4 109M and M=LB = 2:0 is shown as
the solid line; the dashed line indicates the same ring model with a constant inclination of 85o.

                             2.3. Ring Kinematics

    The polar kinematic data set used here is identical to that used by SS, so only a brief review
is presented here. Our analysis, however, and in particular our interpretation of the warp, is
somewhat di erent.

    Two di erent H observations are available for NGC 4650A: the long-slit data of WMS and
the Fabry-Perot data of Nicholson (1989). In Fig. 5, the H line-of-sight ring velocities are shown
as deduced by Nicholson (1989) from his modeling of the Fabry-Perot data and as measured by

WMS along the major axis of the ring after our correction for the ring warp (see x4.1). The rotation

curves derived from each of these two groups agree within the scatter. Neutral hydrogen synthesis

mapping (GSK) in the 21-cm line at the Very Large Array indicates that the HI in NGC 4650A is
                                           { 12 {
associated with the polar ring, and that its kinematics are consistent with that derived from H

studies wherever H and HI are spatially coincident. The HI ring extends about twice as far as

the optical ring, but since the synthesized beam width in the B/C array is about 2000 (FWHP),

the HI measurements have much poorer spatial resolution than the H data. Nevertheless, the
roughly constant rotation speeds of the HI at large galactocentric distances constrain the mass

modeling, in particular constraining the asymptotic rotational support provided by the dark halo.

Fig. 5.{ Over-the-pole speeds of gas orbits in the polar ring of NGC 4650A as a function of distance along
the ring major axis. The data are from WMS after application of the warp correction described in x4.1.

The model velocities of Nicholson (1989) are over-plotted (stars) for comparison. Approaching (southern)
velocities are indicated by open symbols, receding (northern) velocities by solid symbols. The scatter in the
points re ects the uncertainties.

3. The Model

    In order to separate the contribution of the dark matter in NGC 4650A from that of the
luminous matter, we construct a multi-component mass model for the galaxy consisting of a double
exponential disk, a two-component (i.e., stars and gas) ring, and an axisymmetric, attened,
pseudo-isothermal dark halo. Each of these components of the mass model is discussed below.

3.1. Thick Exponential Disk

    We model the central component of NGC 4650A as a double (i.e., thick) exponential disk
(cf. Bahcall & Soneira 1980), with a mass volume density given by

D(R; z) = o;D e R=h e jzj=zo;  (1)
                                                { 13 {

where R and z are cylindrical coordinates in the axisymmetric disk, h is the exponential scale
length of the disk, and zo is the exponential scale height. The central density o;D, is then related
to the total disk mass, MD, through MD = 4 zo o;D h2. The corresponding potential that solves
Poisson's equation for this density distribution is (SS):

                       D(R; z) =  GMD  Z1       dk  Jo(kR) hkzo e  jzj=zo  e kjzji  :                   (2)
                                                     1 + h2k2]3=2          1]
                                        o                          k2zo2

Derivatives of this potential, which we evaluate numerically, give the corresponding gravitational
force for the disk at arbitrary positions in the polar and equatorial planes.

    The thickness of the disk is a matter of some importance for the modeling, not only because
it enters directly in the density distribution (and thus the potential) as the scale height, but also
because it a ects the inferred inclination and radial scale length of the disk. Thus, in order to
place upper and lower limits on the axis ratio of the dark matter distribution we must constrain
the axis ratio of the light distribution.

4.700  In the thin disk approximation (i.e., q    zo=h << 1), the    disk has a scale length of about
       and an axis ratio of q = 0.42 derived    from the axis ratio  of the outer isophotes (WMS).
We derive nearly identical structure parameters from our I-band image (Fig. 2). Fouque et al.
(1990)  have  argued,  however, that q0 is type-dependent, and     suggest that for   galaxies of type  T,
where    5    T 7,     the empirical dependence is of the form     log q0 1 = 0:43 +  0:053 T. Since    in
their system, an elliptical corresponds to T = 5, an E/S0 to T = 3, and an S0 to T = 2,
even a conservative typing of the central galaxy of NGC 4650A as an S0 would yield a thickness
parameter consistent with the central object being edge-on, with a thickness equal to the measured
axis ratio of the light. Therefore, we will take two separate, self-consistent and extreme choices:
(1) a \thin" disk with thickness ratio q0 = 0.2, and (2) a \thick" disk with q0 = 0.4.

    We estimate the disk luminosity and scale length using surface brightness pro les along the
major and minor disk axes and extrapolating over the dusty region where the ring passes in front
of the disk. By integrating Eq. 1 along a line-of-sight that is assumed to be inclined at an angle i
with respect to the normal of the disk, one can derive integral expressions for the projected surface
brightness of a double exponential disk along its major and minor axes, and compare these to the
measured surface brightness pro les. These estimates will depend on the assumed thickness and
inclination of the disk.

    Shown in Fig. 3 are the model predictions for the surface brightness pro les along the major
and minor axes from the thin and thick disk assumptions used here. We have not done formal
 ts, but instead have constrained the thick and thin disk models by requiring that both models
have the same total luminosity and reproduce the minor and major axis pro les reasonably well
in regions that are not likely to be strongly a ected by seeing or dust. Assuming an intrinsic
 attening q0 z0=h = 0.2, typical for late-type spiral disks, yields a disk inclination of 68o using
                                                { 14 {

the classical form:  cos2  i = (q2   q02)=(1 q02). After correcting for external       extinction (using AB
= 0.54, as given in  the   RC3) and  assuming a distance of 35 Mpc (based on           our Hubble constant3
and vLG =     2625 km s    1), we   nd   that   the disk luminosity is then L 3:0      sc1a0le9LhBei;gh,taossfu0m.9i4n0g0.
no intrinsic  absorption.  For a   thin  disk,  the scale length is 4.700, implying a
In order to achieve similar major and minor axis ts with a thick disk (q0 = 0:4) of the same
intrinsic luminosity, we require an inclination of 78o and a scale length of 4.400, corresponding to a
scale height of 1.7600.

    The small, central blue spike in the B-band pro le was interpreted by SS as a small bulge
component with a mass-to-light ratio M=LB 0:5 (in solar units), which was determined from
disk kinematics. An alternate explanation is that this central feature results from a recent burst
of star formation, perhaps due to modest in ow of gas from the polar ring. This could explain its
low M=L and negligible e ect on the dynamical modeling, as noted by SS. For these reasons, we
neglect it in our analysis.

    Once the disk mass-to-light ratio, M=LB, which is assumed to be constant with radius, is
chosen, all model parameters for the central component of NGC 4650A are xed. To estimate
M=LB for the disk, we take the maximum disk hypothesis, which places as much mass as possible
in the disk consistent with rotation curve constraints. If the disk is less than maximum, the dark
halo must supply more attening to the overall potential in order to compensate for the decreased
e ect of the central disk. Thus, by considering only a maximum disk, we place a conservative
limit on the attening of the dark halo. We nd, as did SS, that the polar rotation curve tightly
constrains the maximum disk mass (see Fig. 6). With our warp correction for the ring, we nd
that M=LB 2.0 in solar units for the thin maximum disk, and M=LB 1.75 for the thick
maximum disk, corresponding to disk masses of 6:0 109M and 5:25 109M , respectively.

                           3.2. Two-Component Polar Ring

    The mass of the polar ring of NGC 4650A is non-negligible and must be included in dynamical
modeling (SS). We model the ring with two thin annuli, one for the stellar ring (and its associated
molecular hydrogen complexes), and one for the more radially-extended neutral hydrogen ring.
The mass of the stellar annulus is estimated from optical photometry and CO measurements; the
neutral hydrogen mass is inferred from the 21-cm VLA observations of GSK. The form of the
model mass distribution is given by the di erence of two disks, as described below, with the scale
lengths and masses of each disk chosen so that the resulting annulus will match the total mass
and surface mass pro le (assumed to drop to zero in the middle) deduced from observations. With
the exception of the stellar and CO mass, the ring parameters are identical to those used in SS, to
which we refer the reader for more detail.

  3Throughout this paper we assume a Hubble constant of H0 = 75 km s 1 Mpc 1.
                       { 15 {

The model stellar annulus is formed from the di erence of two n=2 Toomre (1962) disks
with scale lengths of 3500 and 4000. The shape of this pro le, shown in Fig. 4 after correction for
warping (see x4.1), agrees roughly with the distribution of light in the ring and the placement
of the bi-symmetric knots. The ring is about 40% as bright in I as the central body; we use
the I-band light as a rough indicator of stellar mass to estimate the total mass of stars in the
ring. Adopting the \maximum disk" masses from the previous section then yields stellar ring
masses of 2:4 109M for the thin disk model and 2:1 109M for the thick disk model. Using
the usual conversion, the molecular hydrogen content of the inner ring can be inferred from CO
measurements (Watson, Guptill & Buchholz 1994)       to be  8    108M     <M     (H2)  < 16    108M    . The
spatial distribution of the CO more closely follows  that   of  the blue  light  than          in the  ring.
                                                                                       the HI
Adding an intermediate value of M(H2) = 1:2 109M to the stellar ring mass gives 3:6 109M
and 3:3 109M for the combined mass of the inner ring annulus in the thin and thick disk
models, respectively.

   The model HI ring is formed from the di erence of two n=1 Toomre (i.e., Kuzmin) disks
with scale lengths of 2000 and 9000 chosen to match the pro le of the HI contours on the sky (see
SS). After converting the HI mass of GSK to our Hubble constant and correcting for the cosmic
abundance of helium, we nd the ring HI mass to be 6:4 109M . Note that the total mass of the

ring in stars and gas is estimated to be 1 1010M , somewhat smaller than the value assumed
by SS, but larger than the adopted mass of the central luminous disk.

    Polar orbits interior to the bulk of the ring mass are slowed by the net outward force of the
ring, while ring orbits at large radii experience a net inward force and increased over-the-pole
speeds. It was suggested by SS that the self gravity of the ring may cause the depression in the
observed ring speeds at 2500. It is also possible that line-of-sight e ects may play a role, as ring
material at larger radii crosses the ring major axis inward of 3000 in projection.

    Our mass model for the ring is coplanar and axisymmetric in the polar plane. Due to the
presence of the disk and attened halo potentials, however, the resulting ring orbits are oval. The
e ect of this de ciency in the modeling is small. A model with an oval distribution of ring mass
would require more attening in the halo component to compensate for the quadrupole moment
of the ring, which would have the opposite sense as that of the central disk. Thus, by considering
the ring mass to be circular, we place a conservative limit on the halo attening.

                       3.3. Flattened Halo

    Galactic potentials that are substantially attened toward the plane of the disk may or may
be axisymmetric, that is, they may or may not have an axis ratio b=a = 1 in the equatorial
plane. The axisymmetry of the Milky Way at large radii is a subject of controversy (cf. Blitz &
Spergel 1991, Kuijken 1991). The apparent circularity of disk galaxies supports the hypothesis
that galactic potentials do not deviate strongly from axisymmetry, as do N-body simulations that
                                  { 16 {

include the e ects of dissipation (cf. Katz & Gunn 1991, Dubinski 1994). Detailed modeling of

the velocity eld of the equatorial HI ring in the early type galaxy IC 2006 (Franx, van Gorkom

& de Zeeuw 1994) indicates that its galactic potential is axisymmetric to within 5% (i.e., b/a
0.05) with 95% con dence.

    For these reasons, we have chosen a attened, but axisymmetric, pseudo-isothermal ellipsoid
to model the dark halo of NGC 4650A. The density of such a halo, given by,

                    H(R;   z)  =  rc2  +   o;H rc2     ;                                           (3)
                                           R2 + z2=q2

is strati ed on concentric, similar ellipsoids of vertical-to-radial axis ratio q c=a; the radial
pro le is chosen so as to give asymptotically at rotation curves in the equatorial plane with
circular speed vH. By integrating the density distribution described by Eq. 3, the halo mass
enclosed by an ellipsoid of semi-major axis d and axis ratio q can be shown to be

    MH   (<  d)  =  vH2 rc qp1         q2      d   arctan         d       :                        (4)
                      G arccos q               rc                 rc

This model for a attened halo is to be contrasted with an oft-used form in which the potential,
not the density, is strati ed on concentric ellipsoids of constant axis ratio (cf. Binney & Tremaine,
p46). Our parameterization has the advantage of providing a smooth family of attened halo
models that can be extended to in nitely thin systems. Furthermore, the N-body simulations of
Katz & Gunn (1991), which include the hydrodynamics required to model the gaseous component
of galaxy formation, are consistent a constant axis ratio (c=a) for the density of the dark matter
halo at radii beyond the stellar disk (Katz, private communication 1994). The alternative model,
which has isopotentials of constant axis ratio, is computationally more convenient, but produces
density pro les that are strongly \pinched" along the vertical axis for large attenings of the
potential, and requires unphysical negative densities for q < 0:707.

The potential corresponding to our model halo density is given by (cf. SS):

H(R; z) = 2     Gq       rc2  Z 1=q  ln  h  +  xrc22 x2(1Rq22)+1  +   z2  i dx   :                 (5)
                                                                  1
                               o         1      x2(1 q2) +

                    o;H

Although we do not know a closed form expression for this potential, its derivatives with respect
to R and z can be analytically evaluated (with some e ort) to give the forces in cylindrical
coordinates:

Fz  (R;  z)  =  h  vH2 z       arctan ( ) arctan ( )                      ; and                    (6)
                   arctan
                                              { 17 {

FR  (R;  z)  =  h  vH2 R   " 2 arctan (    )  arctan                  2 arctan ( )  arctan  #
                   arctan    21                                      21
                                                                                               ;

where                      p1    q2  ;        s         2c   ;          s 2c
                              q                           h               b+h
                                                b

and

                              h pb2 4ac > 0
                               a (1 q2) rc2
                               b z2 + R2 + (1 q2) rc2 ;
                               c z2 :

We derived these expressions for the forces in cylindrical coordinates before realizing that their
counterparts in ellipsoidal coordinates had already been calculated by de Zeeuw & Pfenniger
(1988) in their encyclopedic paper on potential-density pairs.

   Evaluating the radial force in the equatorial plane, FR (R; 0), in the limit R ! 1 yields

an expression relating the asymptotic circular speed in the halo equatorial plane to the central
density, core radius, and axis ratio of the halo:

                           vH2   =      4  G  op;H1rc2  q arccos  q  :                      (7)
                                                        q2

    In constructing the combined mass model of NGC 4650A, we x the axis ratio q of the
isodensity surfaces and assume that the equatorial symmetry plane of the attened halo is aligned
with the disk plane of the central galaxy of NGC 4650A. The core radius and asymptotic speed of
the halo are then constrained by the observed kinematics.

                           4. Comparing Model Kinematics to the Data

    For each component of the mass model, a gravitational potential satisfying Poisson's equation
is constructed. Derivatives of the combined potential provide the forces at any given point, which
are used to solve for the symmetric, closed orbits in the equatorial disk and polar ring planes
using the numerical shooting algorithm developed by SS. A test particle is launched tangentially
at a speci ed position along the disk (or ring) major axis and its orbit followed by integrating the
equations of motion in the combined potential. The launch speed is adjusted until the orbit closes
on itself; the orbit trajectory is then recorded.
                                           { 18 {

    The contributions to the total potential from the disk and ring are completely speci ed in the

models (x3.1 and x3.2). Since the measured polar speeds have smaller uncertainties and extend to

larger radii than the measured kinematics of the central E/S0 body, we choose a value for the halo
 attening and then use the polar data to constrain the remaining free parameters of the model:
the halo core radius, rc, and asymptotic circular speed of the halo in the equatorial plane, vH.
With all the parameters xed by the polar kinematics, models with di erent halo attening will
then match the equatorial disk rotation curve with di ering degrees of success. This provides the
basis for the measurement of the attening of the dark matter distribution of NGC 4650A.

    The speeds of the fully-determined closed orbits in the equatorial plane provide a measure of
the radial force in the disk. Under the assumption of radial hydrostatic equilibrium, the mean
azimuthal streaming velocity is related to the radial force and radial pressure (velocity dispersion)
in the disk, so that we are able to calculate the streaming velocities from the Jeans equations.
These streaming velocities are then integrated along the line-of-sight and convolved with the
seeing disk to produce line-of-sight velocity and dispersion pro les that can be compared directly

to the new disk kinematics. (The dispersion of H and HI gas is typically 10 km s 1 or less; for

this reason we have ignored the 1{2% correction for radial pressure in the ring models when
comparing them to the gas ring rotation curves of NGC 4650A.)

                   4.1. The Polar Rotation Curve: Ring Warp

    Since the polar ring of NGC 4650A is warped, the change in inclination with ring radius
must be modeled before the over-the-pole speeds are compared to the measured values. Our warp
(twist) model assumes that all orbits are polar, but that their inclinations to the sky plane vary
linearly with galactocentric radius along the ring major axis such that the ring is 10o from edge-on
at the center and is edge-on at 3000. This linear warp correction corresponds to an inclination of

110o at a ring radius of 9000, which roughly agrees with that inferred from the axis ratio of the HI

contours at this radius (GSK). Our model is based on the assumption that the bi-symmetric knots
seen at 3000 (Figs. 2 and 4) are caused by orbit crowding and superposition as the ring warps
through edge-on to the observer at this radius. Such a warp falls within the range of acceptable
models considered by Nicholson (1989) from ts of tilted (circular) ring models to his Fabry-Perot
H velocity eld, and di ers only slightly from that assumed by SS. Since the ring is close to
edge-on over most of its optical radius, the corrections to the line-of-sight speeds are less than 2%
in the range 0{6000. We have applied this warp correction to the polar data plotted in Fig. 5 and
all subsequent gures.

    Since the ring is warped, it is unclear whether the gas seen at small ring radii should be
interpreted as gas in rotation at these positions or as gas from larger orbits seen in projection.
Furthermore, di erential precession of this apparently slightly o -axis polar ring in a attened
potential could result in a rapidly changing inclination inward of about 1000, making the inclination
correction at these small radii, and thus the true over-the-pole velocities, uncertain. Therefore,
            { 19 {

for the purposes of tting models to the polar data, we require that the over-the-pole speeds of
the model polar orbits produce a good t to the H velocities only outward of 1000 and that they

also match the deprojected HI speed of 105{125 km s 1 at 9000. Since the ring may be slightly

non-polar, one might worry that di erential precession would negate the assumption of closed
gas orbits, but since the distribution and kinematics of the polar gas is symmetric out to 9000
and the time for one orbit is substantially shorter than that for di erential precession (Sparke
1986, Sparke 1991), the kinematics of the ring will be close to that of the closed polar orbits.

4.2. The Disk Rotation Curve: Radial Hydrostatic Equilibrium, Line-of-Sight
                      Integration, and Seeing Convolution

    Due to their radial velocity dispersion, stars in the disk are not on closed loop orbits. In order
to compare the closed model orbits to the observed velocities measured along the line-of-sight in
the disk, we must rst calculate the di erence between the local circular speed and the mean
azimuthal streaming speed of the stars. We do this by applying the conditions of radial hydrostatic
equilibrium.

    For an axisymmetric, steady state exponential disk in which the principal axes of the velocity
ellipsoid are aligned with the cylindrical coordinate system of the disk, the di erence between the
square of the local circular speed, vc2, and the square of the local azimuthal streaming, v2, is given
by the Jeans equations as (Binney & Tremaine 1987, p. 198),

vc2 v2 = 2  2  1    R  @@lnR2R                                               (8)
                    h
            R

where h is the scale length of the disk, and and R are the azimuthal and radial components of
the velocity dispersion.

    The di erence between vc and v is often called the asymmetric drift, va. In the limit that
the drift is small, that is that va << 2vc, the left-hand-side of Eq. 8 reduces to 2vavc, and one
obtains an expression that is often used to calculate the asymmetric drift \correction" to convert
observed streaming speeds to circular rotation speeds. Although the assumption that the velocity
dispersion is small compared to the streaming velocity is used to justify the use of epicyclic theory
to compute the relationship between and R, it is important to note that the derivation of Eq. 8
is applicable regardless of the relative size of vc and v , and does not require that the dispersion
be small.

    In most stellar disks, the dispersion decreases outward, so that the mean streaming velocity
is less than the local circular speed, and the di erence between the two decreases rapidly with
radius. For example, if one assumes that the radial velocity dispersion pro le falls exponentially
in radius with a scale length twice that of the light, as has been suggested for the disks of spirals
(cf. van der Kruit & Freeman 1986, Bottema 1990), then the last term in Eq. 8 reduces to
            { 20 {

+ (R=h) R2 , and the asymmetric drift decreases exponentially in magnitude with increasing radius.
The dispersion in the central disk of NGC 4650A, however, appears to be nearly constant with
radius (Fig. 1), so that radial pressure support is important at all radii.

    In computing the asymmetric drift for NGC 4650A, we assume that the intrinsic (which
is the component of the velocity dispersion measured directly in this highly inclined system)
falls linearly, from a central value of 66 km s 1 to 62 km s 1 at one scale length. After
seeing convolution and integration along the line-of-sight, the predicted pro le is consistent with
the observed line-of-sight dispersion (see Figs. 7{10). Such a slowly declining pro le is more
conservative assumption than a constant dispersion pro le because falling dispersion will predict
larger streaming speeds for a given halo attening, and thus require rounder halos to t the same
equatorial rotation curve. We consider then two extreme cases to bracket the behavior of R,
namely, that the central stellar component is (1) a hot, isotropic system with R = at all radii,
and (2) su ciently cold (supported by rotation) that R is related to through the epicyclic

approximation. These ability of these two alternatives to t the data is examined in x5, where we

display comparisons between model and observed kinematics.
    For the assumption of isotropic dispersion, the streaming velocities v can be computed

directly as a function of R from Eq. 8. In the epicyclic approximation, the azimuthal and radial
velocity dispersions are related through

            22                                                       (9)
               =
            2     4  2

            R

where and are the circular and epicyclic frequencies given by

=  vc  and        2  =  R  d2  +  4                            2  :  (10)
   R                       dR

Since the mass models provide the circular speed, vc, as a function of R, we compute directly
from the model rotation curve and its derivatives via Eqs. 10, express R2 as a function of 2
through equation Eq. 9, and then compute the streaming velocities from Eq. 8.

    Once the streaming velocities appropriate for each model have been computed in the plane of
the central stellar component, they are projected onto the sky plane, integrated self-consistently
along the line-of-sight through the thick, inclined disk, and convolved with seeing to produce the
model line-of-sight velocities at each position that will be compared directly to the observations.
The line-of-sight integration is performed using streaming velocities and dispersions from the
modeling to construct a three-dimensional model for the luminous disk. For points above and
below the equatorial plane of the disk, the galaxy is assumed to be in cylindrical rotation. The
intensity at any point is assumed to be that of a thick exponential disk with the inclination, disk

scale length and scale height appropriate for the \thin" and \thick" disk assumptions of x3.1. The

intrinsic spectral lines are assumed to be Gaussian and isotropic. The integration is performed
                                           { 21 {
along a path length equivalent to 8 disk scale heights, and is convolved with a (circular) Gaussian
with FWHM = 2.2500 to model seeing. The resulting line-of-sight velocities and line-of-sight
dispersions are then compared directly to the observations.

Fig. 6.{ Top Panel: The e ect of velocity corrections on the \Thick Disk + Ring + E7 Halo" model with

isotropic velocity dispersion. The thick solid line shows the circular rotation speed as a function of radius for
this model. The dashed line indicates the streaming velocity after radial hydrostatic equilibrium has been
enforced, and the thin solid line indicates line-of-sight velocities after correction for inclination, integration
along the line-of-sight, and seeing convolution. The data are the new disk kinematics presented in x2.1.

Bottom Panel: The thick solid line shows the over-the-pole speeds for the same model superposed on

the warp-corrected polar kinematics; the thin line indicates over-the-pole speeds for the thick maximum
disk plus ring alone.

    The e ects of the pressure support (velocity dispersion), seeing convolution, and integration
along the line-of-sight are illustrated in the top panel of Fig. 6. In this gure, the thick solid line
indicates the circular rotation curve for the \Thick Disk + Ring + E7 Halo" model. The dashed
line shows the predicted streaming speeds after radial hydrostatic equilibrium has been enforced
under the assumption of an isotropic velocity ellipsoid. The thin solid line shows the line-of-sight
speeds after these streaming speeds have been convolved along the line-of-sight and with the
seeing disk. Since the velocity dispersion does not fall appreciably with radius, pressure support
is important at all radii. For nearly edge-on systems like the disk of NGC 4650A, the (1= sin i)
inclination correction to the velocities is quite small, but the convolution e ects can be substantial,
especially at small radii where the line of sight samples material at substantially di ering radii
and the seeing disk contains regions of the galaxy that are far from the major axis of the disk.
                                             { 22 {

                               5. The Shape of the Dark Halo

    The kinematics of NGC 4650A clearly indicate the presence of dark matter. In the bottom
panel of Fig. 6, the over-the-pole speeds for a \Thick Disk + Ring + E7 Halo" model with
isotropic dispersion are overplotted (thick solid line) on the warp-corrected polar ring kinematics.
Also shown are the over-the-pole speeds that would be expected for the disk and ring alone (thin
solid line). The gravitational force provided by the luminous matter alone is clearly insu cient to
support the large rotation speeds observed in the polar ring of NGC 4650A at large galactocentric
radius.

    The results for our four models | the maximum \thin" and \thick" disks considered in

x3.1, and the two di erent models for the velocity dispersion ellipsoid, namely the epicyclic and
isotropic assumptions detailed in x4.2 | are presented in Figs. 7{10. The gures display, for four

di erent halo attenings, ts to the over-the-pole speeds in the ring (top panel), the resulting
line-of-sight velocities in the disk (middle panel), and the assumed line-of-sight disk dispersions
(bottom panel), superposed on the data points. Since the interpretation of the polar line-of-sight
speeds is most uncertain inward of 1000, we do not use these points to constrain the models and
do not display the model curves in this radial range. As the top panels of Figs. 7{10 illustrate,
by adjusting the otherwise unconstrained halo parameters rc and vH, very similar ts to a single
rotation curve (in this case, the polar curve) can be achieved with halos of di erent attening.
Another constraint (here, the equatorial disk rotation curve) is required to break this degeneracy.
Flattened halos produce orbits that are elongated along the polar axis and have over-the-pole
speeds that are lower than those in a spherical halo with the same rc and vH. Thus, in order to
reproduce the same polar rotation curve, attened halos will require larger vH and smaller rc.

For a given halo attening and disk model, the combination of the well-sampled H polar
rotation curve  from  10{6000  and the polar    HI    speeds at large  distances allow us to determine  vH
to typically 5  km s  1 and    rc to typically        we give rc and   vH to this precision in Table 3  for
                                                100;
each of the four halo attenings (E5, E6, E7, and E8) considered. The central density of the
halo, which depends on these two parameters and the halo axis ratio, can be computed from the
relationship given by Eq. 7 in x3.3. The amount of dark matter enclosed in each model by an
ellipsoid of semi-major axis d and axis ratio q can be computed via Eq. 4; this quantity is tabulated
in Table 3 for all models at a ducial distance of d = 6000 as measured in the equatorial plane.
Mass outside this ellipsoid does not a ect circular rotation in the equatorial plane interior to d.
Since for distances much larger than the core radius of the halo, the mass of an oblate halo grows
linearly with distance along a given axis, signi cantly more dark matter is required to explain the
deprojected HI velocities of 120 km s 1 at polar galactocentric distances of 90{12000. Note that
for attened halos, the usual measure of the total enclosed mass responsible for a circular speed
ve at a distance R in the equatorial plane, namely ve2R=G, is not reliable.
                                           { 23 {

Figs. 7. and 8.{ Left (Fig. 7): Thin Disk (i = 68o, qo = 0:2) with a velocity ellipsoid consistent with
the epicyclic approximation. Top Panel: Model over-the-pole speeds as a function of distance along the

major axis of the ring for potentials consisting disk, ring, and E5, E6, E7, or E8 halos, superposed on

the polar data of WMS (squares) and Nicholson (stars). Middle Panel: Model line-of-sight velocities

along the major axis of the disk in the same combined potentials, superposed on the observed velocities

from the new disk kinematics presented here. Bottom Panel: Model line-of-sight velocity dispersion in

the disk superposed on the new data. Note the di erent spatial scales between the top and bottom two

panels. Right (Fig. 8): Same as Fig. 7 but for the Thin Disk (i = 68o, qo = 0:2) with isotropic velocity

dispersion.
    The most striking result of this work is that all models with dark halos rounder than E6

or atter than E7 are unable to reproduce the kinematics of NGC 4650A. Within the context
of these models, then, the axis ratio of the isodensity surfaces the dark halo of this galaxy are
constrained to lie between c=a = 0.3 and c=a = 0.4. We nd (as did SS) that the ts to the polar
rotation curve improve slightly if the disk is not maximal; we chose maximal disks in order to
place the largest amount of the attening in the disk as possible, thereby enabling us to place a
conservative limit on the attening of the dark matter halo. Models with a \cold" central disk for
                                           { 24 {
NGC 4650A that make use of the epicyclic approximation to link the radial and azimuthal velocity
dispersions (Figs. 7 and 9) are unable to reproduce the nearly linear rise of the observed disk
speeds at small radii; a \hot" disk with isotropic dispersion (Figs. 8 and 10) does much better. As
one would expect, a thinner disk (Figs. 7 and 8) requires a slightly rounder halo to produce the
same general amplitude for the disk rotation curve, but the overall t is better for the thick disk
models (Figs. 9 and 10). Despite the smaller radial scale length h of the thick disk, it is better
able to reproduce the slow rise in observed disk speeds because its increased inclination increases
the e ect of line-of-sight and seeing convolution. The best ts to all available photometry and
kinematics of NGC 4650A are thus provided by mass models that combine a massive polar ring
with a thick, highly inclined disk and an E6{E7 halo (Fig. 10).

Figs. 9. and 10.{ Left (Fig. 9): Same as Fig. 7 but for the Thick Disk (i = 78o, qo = 0:4) with a
velocity ellipsoid consistent with the epicyclic approximation. Right (Fig. 10): Thick Disk (i = 78o,

qo = 0:4) with isotropic velocity dispersion.
    As an independent check on the attening of the mass distribution of NGC 4650A at large

galactocentric distance, we can ask whether its circular rotation speed in the equatorial plane

is in agreement with the magnitude-HI linewidth (or Tully-Fisher) relation derived for disk
                               { 25 {

galaxies. Although it is by no means certain that this magnitude-linewidth relation can be applied
to polar-ring galaxies, it does work well over a wide variety of galaxy types. The relation is
calibrated using spirals whose gas resides in the equatorial plane. The gas that de nes the width
of the line pro le is located at large radii on the at part of the rotation curve, and thus rotates
with the asymptotic equatorial speed of the galaxy. If the galactic potential is spherical, the
magnitude-linewidth relation should be independent of the plane in which the gas rotates. If
the mass distribution is highly attened, on the other hand, gas on polar orbits around a galaxy
viewed edge-on would be expected to have smaller linewidth than spirals with the same optical
magnitude.

                    Table 3: Model Parameters
            (r00c)     vH      vp(12000)  ve2(R10(69M000)=)G  MH(< 6000)
  Halo              ( km s 1)  ( km s 1)                       (109M )
Flattening

                     Figs. 7 and 8: Thin Disk
i = 68o, MD = 6:0 109M , h = 4.700, qo = 0.2, MR = 10 109M

E5 15               160        123             50             17
E6 13               165        122             56             14
E7 11               170        120             62             12
E8 9                175        118             68             8

                    Figs. 9 and 10: Thick Disk
i = 78o, MD = 5:25 109M , h = 4.400, qo = 0.4, MR = 9:7 109M

E5 14               160        123             50             16
E6 12               165        122             56             13
E7 10               170        120             63             11
E8 8                175        119             69             7

    To apply this test to NGC 4650A, we use our measured I-band magnitude of mI =11.43 and
a distance based on the redshift (corrected to the Local Group) of vLG =2625 km s 1 to predict
the asymptotic, equatorial speed of NGC 4650A from the I-band magnitude-linewidth relation of
Guhathakurta et al. (1993). This value can then be compared to the equatorial speed derived
from our mass models of di ering halo attening (Table 3). We note that NGC 4650A does not
appear to be located in a region of strong peculiar ow, since a distance of 2725 71 km s 1
is derived from a smooth radial velocity eld based on POTENT and Tully-Fisher and D-
distances (Bertschinger, private communication 1994). With the ring light included and no
correction for internal extinction, the predicted equatorial linewidth is 366 km s 1; this width
can only be matched by halo models atter than E8. Excluding the ring light gives 326 km s 1
                                             { 26 {

(matched by E5{E6 halo models). If the internal extinction correction used by Guhathakurta
et al. (1993) is applied, the predicted linewidth is 383 km s 1 ( atter than E8) with the ring light
and 341 km s 1 (E7) without. Using the bulk- ow-corrected distance increases the predicted
linewidth by 3%. The Guhathakurta et al. relation has a 1- scatter of 0.13 magnitudes, which
corresponds to 16 km s 1 in the linewidth. Note that if the potential of NGC 4650A were
spherical, one would expect these estimates for the equatorial linewidth to match the measured

polar HI linewidth of 240 km s 1, which they do not: a spherical halo is inconsistent at the

5{10 level. Since it is likely that the ring represents delayed infall of material into a pre-existing
galactic potential dominated by the dark halo, estimates that do not include the ring light may
be the most appropriate. The magnitude-linewidth relation would thus predict a linewidth of
334 24 km s 1 (an equatorial circular rotation speed of 167 12 km s 1) for NGC 4650A,
arguing strongly against a spherical dark halo, but in remarkable agreement with our result of an
E6{E7 dark halo based on detailed mass modeling.

               6. Discussion and Conclusions

    Dark matter in galaxies dominates at large radii, where most rotation curves exhibit only
principal two features: a turn-over radius and an asymptotic speed. This means that even if the
structure parameters for the luminous matter are completely speci ed, a single rotation curve
constrains only two of the three parameters required to de ne an ellipsoidal, pseudo-isothermal
dark halo: the core radius, rc; asymptotic equatorial rotation speed, vH; and density axis ratio, q.
The additional constraints in PRG provided by the orthogonal polar ring kinematics break this
degeneracy allowing one to determine the attening of the dark halo.

Our detailed analysis of existing data and new absorption-line disk kinematics for the polar
ring galaxy NGC 4650A indicates that the dark matter halo of this system is signi cantly attened
toward the plane of the central body. A good t to all available data for NGC 4650A is provided
by a thick stellar exponential disk, (with i = 78o, MD = 5:3 109 M , h = 4.400, z0 = 1.7600, and a
slowly declining isotropic velocity dispersion 60 km s 1), surrounded by a massive, warped
polar ring of  gas and stars (with mass MR    9:7   109M      warping  through edge-on at    ring radius
  3000), and   a attened, pseudo-isothermal  dark  halo with  density  axis ratio 0:3 < c=a  < 0:4 (and
rc = 10{1200 and vH = 165{170 km s 1). Wherever the data were ambiguous, we have attempted
to err on the side of favoring rounder halos: (1) maximum disk solutions were used throughout,
(2) a slowly declining line-of-sight velocity dispersion was adopted although a at pro le is also
consistent, and (3) the mass model for the polar ring was taken to be axisymmetric rather than
oval. In this sense, the conclusion that the dark matter of NGC 4650A is attened toward the
central plane with an E6{E7 shape is conservative.

    The central body of NGC 4650A was originally typed by Lausten & West (1980) as an
E6{E7 elliptical. Since the axis ratio of the projected light from the central body is about 0.4, the
intrinsic shape of the luminous body must be E6 or atter, but as an early type galaxy (E/S0), its
                                           { 27 {

axis ratio is almost certainly larger than 0.3 (E7 or rounder). Although discovery of its rotation
led to an S0 typing for the central body of NGC 4650A, a more correct description may be an
oblate rotator with an exponential pro le. Indeed, the substantial and nearly constant line-of-sight
dispersion with radius might be the consequence heating during the interaction that produced the
polar ring. The value of v= 1 that we observe at the half-light radius of the central component
of NGC 4650A is consistent with both an isotropic oblate rotator (see Binney & Tremaine 1987,
p. 217) with an axis ratio c/a = 0.6 (E4) and an anisotropic rotator (isotropy parameter = 1/2)
with c/a = 0.3 (E7). Taken together with the main conclusion of this paper | that the dark halo
of this galaxy has a attening of E6{E7 { this leads one to the remarkable conclusion that the
light and dark matter in NGC 4650A have nearly identical attening.

    The notion that the radial distributions of dark and luminous matter in galaxies are correlated
so as to \conspire" to produce at rotations was rst suggested by Bahcall & Casertano (1985).
The conspiracy may not be as devious or ubiquitous as it rst appeared and may be partially
explained by the secondary infall of halo material during disk formation (for a review, see Ashman
1992 and references therein), but dark and luminous radial structure parameters are clearly
related. The coincidence of shapes for the dark and luminous matter in NGC 4650A may be an
indication that the vertical distribution of light and dark mass is also correlated; more galaxies
must be studied to ascertain whether this is a general property of galactic structure.

    The shape of dark matter halos provides a clue as to the nature of the dark constituents. In
recent N-body simulations of dissipationless collapse, triaxial dark halos are formed preferentially
over spherical halos (e.g., Frenk et al. 1988, Dubinski & Carlberg 1991, Warren et al. 1992). When
a small fraction ( 10%) of dissipative gas is added to these simulations, the resulting halos are
more nearly oblate than prolate, and outside the inner several kiloparsec have vertical-to-radial
axis ratios of c=a > 0:5 (Katz & Gunn 1991, Dubinski 1994). Thus, dark halos signi cantly atter
than E5 may suggest that the dark matter has undergone dissipational collapse, which would
be more natural in the context of baryonic models of dark matter. It is therefore of primary
importance to determine whether the highly attened halo of NGC 4650A is typical.

    The principal results and implications of our observations and analysis of polar ring galaxy
NGC 4650A can be summarized in three main points, subject to the assumptions inherent in the
modeling:

      The dark matter halo of NGC 4650A, if well-represented by an pseudo-isothermal ellipsoid,
has isodensity surfaces that have a vertical-to-radial axis ratio 0:3 < c=a < 0:4, i.e., has a shape
between E6 and E7.

      The central luminous object of NGC 4650A is an early-type system with an intrinsic axis
ratio that is quite similar to that of its dark matter halo.

      The attening that we infer for the dark halo of NGC 4650A is larger than that predicted
from N-body collapse simulations of dissipationless dark matter.
                                           { 28 {

    It is a pleasure to express gratitude to Linda Sparke for many useful comments bearing on this
project and for a critical reading of the manuscript. We thank Marijn Franx, Masataka Fukugita,
Raja Guhathakurta, and Brad Whitmore for valuable discussions, and Ed Bertschinger for
providing the software enabling us to estimate the peculiar velocity of NGC 4650A. Observations
reported in this work were carried out at the European Southern Observatory, La Silla Chile, and
the Mt. Stromlo and Siding Springs Observatory, Australia. Work by PDS was supported in part
by the National Science Foundation (AST 92-15485) and a grant from the J. Seward Johnson
Charitable Trust. HWR was supported by a Hubble fellowship (HF-1024.01-91A).

                                REFERENCES

Alcock, C., et al. 1993, Nature, 365, 621
Arnaboldi, M., Capaccioli, M., Cappellaro, E., Held, E.V., & Sparke, L. 1993, A&A, 267, 21
Ashman, K.M. 1992, PASP, 104, 1109
Athanassoula, E. & Sellwood, J. A. 1987, in Dark Matter in the Universe, IAU Symposium

      No. 117, eds. J. Kormendy and G. Knapp (Reidel, Dordrecht) p300
Aubourg E., et al. 1993, Nature, 365, 623
Bahcall, J.N., & Casertano, S. 1895 ApJ, 293, L7
Bahcall, J.N., & Soneira, R.M. 1980, ApJ, 44, 73
Binney, J., May, A. & Ostriker, J.P. 1987, MNRAS, 226, 149
Binney, J. & Tremaine, S. 1987, Galactic Dynamics, (Princeton University Press: Princeton) p

      216-218.
Blitz, L. & Spergel, D.N. 1991, ApJ, 370, 205
Bottema, R. 1990, A&A, 233, 372
Buote, D.A. & Canizares, C. R. 1994, to appear in May 20 ApJ
Casertano, S., Sackett, P.D., & Briggs, F.H. 1991, Warped Disks and Inclined Rings around

      Galaxies, (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge)
de Vaucouleurs, G., de Vaucouleurs, A., Corwin, H.G. Jr., Buta, R.J., Paturel, G. & Fouque, P.

      1991, Third Reference Catalogue of Bright Galaxies, Univ. of Texas Press, Austin (RC3)
de Zeeuw, T. & Pfenniger, D. 1988, MNRAS, 235, 949
Dubinski, J. 1994, submitted to ApJ
                                           { 29 {

Dubinski, J. & Carlberg, R. 1991, ApJ, 378, 496
Fouque, P., Bottinelli. L., Gouguenheim, L., & Paturel, G. 1990, ApJ, 349, 1
Franx, M., van Gorkom, J., & de Zeeuw, T. 1994, submitted to ???
Frenk, C. S., White, S. D. M., Davis, M., & Efstathiou, G. 1988, ApJ, 327, 507
Gould, A., Miralda-Escude, J., & Bahcall, J. 1994, submitted to ApJ
Guhathakurta, P., Bernstein, G., Raychaudhury, S., Haynes, M., Giovanelli, R., Herter, T., &

      Vogt, N. 1993, PASP, 105, 1022
Kalnajs, A. J. 1987, in Dark Matter in the Universe, IAU Symposium No. 117, eds. J. Kormendy

      and G. Knapp (Reidel, Dordrecht) p289
Katz, N. & Gunn, J. E. 1991, ApJ, 377, 365
Kuijken, K. 1991, in Warped Disks and Inclined Rings around Galaxies, eds. S. Casertano, P.D.

      Sackett & F.H. Briggs (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge), p159
Lausten, S. & West, R. M. 1980, J. Astrophys. Astr., 1, 177
Nicholson, R. A. 1989, Ph.D. thesis, Sussex University, United Kingdom
Ostriker, J. P. & Peebles, P. J. E. 1973, ApJ, 186, 467
Richter, O.-G., Sackett, P.D., & Sparke, L.S. 1994, AJ, 107, 99
Rix, H.-W. & White, S.D.M. 1992, MNRAS, 254, 389
Rix, H.-W., Kennicutt, R., Braun, R. & Walterbos, R. 1994, to be submitted to ApJ
Sackett, P.D., & Gould, A. 1993, ApJ, 419, 648
Sackett, P.D., & Sparke, L.S. 1990, ApJ, 361, 408 (SS)
Schechter, P. L., Ulrich, M.-H. & Boksenberg, A. 1984, ApJ, 277, 526
Schechter, P.L., Sancisi, R., van Woerden, H., & Lynds, C.R. 1984, MNRAS, 208, 111
Schweizer, F., Whitmore, B.C., & Rubin, V.C. 1983, AJ, 88, 909
Shane, W.W. 1980, A&A, 82, 314
Sparke, L.S. 1986, MNRAS, 219, 657
Sparke, L.S. 1991, in Warped Disks and Inclined Rings around Galaxies, eds. S. Casertano, P.D.

      Sackett & F.H. Briggs (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge), p85
                                           { 30 {
Steiman-Cameron, T. Y. & Durisen, R. H. 1982, ApJ, 263, L51
Steiman-Cameron, T. Y., Kormendy, J. & Durisen, R. H. 1992, AJ, 104, 1339
Toomre, A. 1962, ApJ, 138, 385
Udalski, A., Szymanski, J., Kaluzny, J., Kubiak, M., Krzeminski, W., Mateo, M., Preston, G. W.,

      & Paczynski, B. 1993, Acta Astronomica, 43,, 289
van Gorkom, J.H., Schechter, P.L., & Kristian, J. 1987, ApJ, 314, 457 (GSK)
van der Kruit, P. C. & Freeman, K. C. 1986, ApJ, 303, 556
Warren, M. S., Quinn, P. J., Salmon, J. K., & Zurek, W. H. 1992, ApJ, 399, 405
Watson, D.M., Guptill, M.T., Buchholz, L.M. 1994, ApJ, 420, L21
Whitmore, B.C., McElroy, D., & Schweizer, F. 1987, ApJ, 314, 439 (WMS)
Whitmore, B.C., Lucas, R.A., McElroy, D.B., Steiman-Cameron, T.Y., Sackett, P.D., & Olling,

      R.P. 1990, AJ, 100, 1489

   This preprint was prepared with the AAS LATEX macros v3.0.
